docs(bodiless-documentation): Add Site Build Guide (#131)
johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS: packages/bodiless-documentation/doc/Development/Guides/BuildingSites/BuildingOverview.md

# Building a Site using Bodiless

This guide is a suggested process for building sites using Bodiless.

## Table of Contents

* [Prerequisites](#Prerequisites)
* [1. Creating a New Site](#_1-create-a-new-site-with-the-bodiless-starter)
* [2. Setting up Design System](#_2-setting-up-design-system)
* [3. Components](#_3-components)
* [4. Templates or One-off Custom Pages](#_4-templates-or-one-off-custom-pages)

## Prerequisites

As a precursor, we highly recommend reading the following basics & guides as
this guide builds upon that knowledge.

> * [Creating a Site](/About/GettingStarted)

Author: Addressed

* [Site Build Basics](/Development/Guides/SiteBuildBasics)
* [Design Element Basics](/Development/Guides/DesignElementBasics)
* [Design System Architecture](/Design/DesignSystem)
* [Tailwind Utlity Framework](https://tailwindcss.com/)

## 1. Create a new site with the Bodiless Starter

Follow the directions to create a new site using the

>    [starter site instructions](/About/GettingStarted?id=creating-a-new-site).

Author: Addressed

## 2. Setting up Design System

> This is where you will begin setting up your typography requirements of your site.

Author: Added it could be site design

Bodiless use Design Tokens to start developing the simple/atomic design elements
used for a site. These are the foundation elements/tokens that you can build

> upon to extend and build a design system for your site. The starter kit provides

Author: Addressed

a beginning set of tokens to start utilizing and they can be found in

> `src/components/Elements.token.ts`. These can be customized to meet your

Author: @wodenx  I left this purposely as not linked because I want them to find it the site they have started.

requirements and additional ones can be added.

### Setup Tokens

#### Elements.token & Tailwind Interaction

> Within `Elements.token.ts` you will find Element tokens that utilize

Author: Addressed

addClasses() to add class names, usually these are utility-first Tailwind
classes but regular css classes can be added as well. The starter kit offers
default Tailwind classes but you may have to provide addition definitions, such
as custom colors. For more information on doing this, read
[Tailwind with Bodiless](/Development/Guides/BuildingSites/TailwindGuide.md)

##### Tokens in Elements.token.ts

The following is set of example tokens we provide in the starter site. These are

> single "atoms" of design that will be used in the more complex components.

Author: Addressed

const asYMargin = addClasses('my-2');
const asNegXMargin = addClasses('-mx-2');
const asNegYMargin = addClasses('-my-2');
const asPadding = addClasses('p-4');
const asXPadding = addClasses('px-2');
const asYPadding = addClasses('py-2');
```

The above section are tokens that are reused to layout blocks on a page as well
as standard margin/padding that site will use.

```
/* Primary coloring */
const asPrimaryColorBackground = addClasses('bg-gray-200');
const asTextColorPrimary = addClasses('text-black');
```

This section defines the coloring to be used.

```
// Typography
const asBold = addClasses('font-bold');
const asLink = addClasses('text-brand_lightblue underline');
const asSuperScript = addClasses('');
const asHeader1 = flow(addClasses('text-3xl'), asTextColorPrimary, asBold);
const asHeader2 = flow(addClasses('text-2xl', asBold));
```

This section starts defining the typography for the site.

Take special note that `asHeader1` starts combining the previously defined
tokens and additional classes to generate a black bold header.

The `Elements.token.ts` consists of your atoms or building blocks that will be
shared among all your components/pages/templates.

> As you create more element tokens & complex design tokens, a site builder has

Author: addressed

the choice to either add them to `Elements.token.ts`, an additional global
tokens file, or a component folder. A suggested practice is the following:

* Very small, atom-like, that are reused across site go into `Elements.token.ts`
* Specific tokens (atom-size or small molecules) that are reused throughout site
  but not large enough to be in their own folder. We recommend creating files

>   with a descriptive title that describes the type of tokens it contains. A

Author: addressed

  example is create page.token.ts where you could store an components that help
  layout pages (sections, indents, etc).
* Token styling of components should be stored with the individual components.

### Fonts

Websites often use custom fonts and Bodiless is very flexible in how these can
be added.  For more details please read using [Fonts](/Development/Guides/BuildingSites/Fonts).

> ## 3. Components

Author: @wodenx  to me Components and Component Tokens is more than design system.
I changed name put left it its own section.

A Bodiless site is built out of many components. The starter kit comes with some
ready-made and re-usable components and can be found in `/src/components`

### Components that come in the Starter Kit

The following components are part of the Starter Kit and you can start modifying
to meet your requirements. The starter kit has elements that every site will
probably use in some form.

> * Header: `src/components/Layout/header.tsx`

Author: Addressed

* Footer: `src/components/Layout/footer.tsx`
* Layout: `src/components/Layout/index.jsx`
* Rich Text Editors: `src/components/Editors/*` that are defined by default
  * Simple : Superscript Only
  * Basic : Superscript, Bold, Italic, Underline, Link, Align Text
  * Full Featured : adds in more functionality to Basic such as Strikethru, headers, quotes.
  * These can be easily customized or extended to support editor requirements for your site.
* Touts: `src/components/Touts`
  * Touts are blocks of content that can include Image, Title, Body, Call to Action Link.
* Images: `src/components/Images`
* Menu & Mobile Burger menu: `src/components/Menus`

For a more in-depth guide about these see

> [Explanation of Components that come in the Starter Kit](/Development/Guides/BuildingSites/ComponentsStarterKit).

Author: Addressed

### Identify Components used in a site and their variations

Since the building of the site is composing of many types of different
components. The first step is determining what components your site will need.
The above components provided by the starter kit are fundamental components your
site will most likely use. If you do not need that component, feel free to
remove it.

> As you look through the site build assets provided for a new site or existing

Author: @wodenx  I agree and thus moved it this topic into a separate page and started expanding it out (IdentifyingComponentsGuide.md).  I would suggest starting with this and expand on it later.

site, you will want to identify types of components required.

This requires more in-depth walk thru so read more in-depth on
[how to identify components & variations](/Development/Guides/BuildingSites/IdentifyingComponentsGuide).

Once done, you will have generated a list of components your new site will use,
as well as, possible variations of any of those components. This will help
determine:

> * what components you can use from Bodiless packages as is.

Author: @wodenx not necessarily, some of them don't require styling to be used.  i.e. Image

* what components can be extended/varied with tokens to meet the site requirements.
* what variations of the components will need to be built.

and with this knowledge can help scope, estimate & plan the site build.

### Building Out Components

You can start building out components that have been identified as reusable or
wait until template/page is built that needs that component.

We recommend reading some of the following guides:

* [Refining the editor components](/Components/RichText?id=richtext-component) to meet your site's requirements.
* [Building Site Components Guide](/TBD)
* [FlowContainer Guide](/Components/FlowContainer.md)

In general, we recommend as best practice to create components in their own
folders unless they are super small. The recommendation is a folder name as the
name of the component. Within the folder component, a suggested pattern is that

> it will have at least an index.tsx that defines the HOC and a token.ts file that

Author: @wodenx  Agree -- but was saving this for another tutorials..   * [Building Site Components Guide](/TBD)

contains the design styling of the component but depending on complexity it
could have more.

> ## 4. Templates or One-off Custom Pages

Reviewer: I see you describe the flow container below in "ComponentStarterKit" - so maybe we can just link there.

> ## 4. Templates or One-off Custom Pages

Author: I was going to dive more into FlowContainer in template guide -> https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/pull/425 and its mentioned there.

### Identifying Templates

Bodiless uses templates to help make your site build faster by reusing patterns.
The next step in the process is to analyze the site build (assets provided for a
new site or an existing site) looking for commonality in the page layouts. Often
you might find the following:

* Article Pages (Could be one article layout style or several article styles)
* Product Listing Page
* Product Detail Page
* Utility Pages (Such as Privacy, Cookie, etc)

If you see a pattern that site uses same layout more than once, which you would
expect this to happen, this is beneficial to group these pages and create a
template for each group.  

Please read using [templates](./Templates/Templates.md) for deeper dive.

### Identifying One-off Custom Pages

A site may have a custom unique layout for a single page. For example, a
homepage often has unique layout or complex layout that is not reused. This page
can be created as page directly within `src/pages/` in the correct path for
display. An example of this is the
[homepage of test site](https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/blob/master/examples/test-site/src/data/pages/index.tsx).

> If in the future, if similar pages are added this one-off custom page could be

Author: addressed

# Building a Site using Bodiless

This guide is a suggested process for building sites using Bodiless.

> The are two use cases for building sites.

Reviewer 2: There are

Author: addressed

> * A brand new site build with new assets (Typography, Design & Copy Deck).

Reviewer 2: should typography et al be capitalized?

Author: addressed

from the existing site.

## Table of Contents

* [Prerequisites](#Prerequisites)
* [1. Creating a New Site](#_1-create-a-new-site-with-the-bodiless-starter)
* [2. Setting up Design System](#_2-setting-up-design-system)
* [3. Components](#_3-components)
* [4. Templates or One-off Custom Pages](#_4-templates-or-one-off-custom-pages)

## Prerequisites

As a precursor, we highly recommend reading the following basics & guides as
this guide builds upon that knowledge.

* [Creating a Site](../../../About/GettingStarted)
* [Site Build Basics](../../Guides/SiteBuildBasics)
* [Design Element Basics](../../Guides/DesignElementBasics)
* [Design System Architecture](../../../Design/DesignSystem)
* [Tailwind Utlity Framework](https://tailwindcss.com/)

## 1. Create a new site with the Bodiless Starter

Follow the directions to create a new site using the
   [starter site instructions](../../../About/GettingStarted?id=creating-a-new-site).

## 2. Setting up Design System

This is where site builder will begin setting up the typography and site level
design requirements of the site.

The basic units of design in Bodiless are

> [Tokens](../../../Design/DesignSystem?id=element-tokens). These are the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Tokens](../../../Design/DesignSystem?id=element-tokens). Tokens are the foundation that the site builder can build upon or extend to build a design system for the site. The starter kit provides a beginning set of tokens to
start utilizing. This set can be found in `src/components/Elements.token.ts`.
These tokens can be customized to meet the site's requirements and additional tokens can
be added.
```

foundation that site builder can build upon or extend to build a design system
for the site, The starter kit provides provides a beginning set of tokens to
start utilizing and they can be found in `src/components/Elements.token.ts`.
These can be customized to meet the site's requirements and additional ones can
be added.

The default tailwind configurations also sets global configuration elements to
set items such as site width and breakpoints.

### Setup Tokens

#### Tailwind Configuration

Within `Elements.token.ts` the site builder will find Element tokens that

> utilize addClasses() to add class names, usually these are utility-first

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
utilize `addClasses()` to add class names, usually these are utility-first
```

Tailwind classes but regular css classes can be added as well. The starter kit

> offers default Tailwind classes but site builder may have to provide addition

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
offers default Tailwind classes but site builder may have to provide additional
```

Author: Resolved -- chris has same suggestion and used his.

definitions, such as custom colors. For more information on doing this, read
[Tailwind with Bodiless](./TailwindGuide.md)

##### Element Tokens

The following is set of example element tokens we provide in the starter site.
These correspond to single atoms that will be used in the more complex
components. In Bodiless, tokens are generally expressed as React High Order
components.

> Here is sampling of tokens that could be used. For full set of tokens, after

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is a sampling of tokens that could be used. For full set of tokens, after
```

site builder generates a new site from the starter site, reference the site's
`src/components/Elements.token.ts` file for full set or
[code](https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/blob/master/examples/starter/src/components/Elements.token.ts).

```
const asPageContainer = addClasses('container mx-auto p-0 md:p-3');
const asSectionContainer = addClasses('container mx-auto my-6');

const asMargin = addClasses('m-2');
const asXMargin = addClasses('mx-2');
const asYMargin = addClasses('my-2');
const asNegXMargin = addClasses('-mx-2');
const asNegYMargin = addClasses('-my-2');
const asPadding = addClasses('p-4');
const asXPadding = addClasses('px-2');
const asYPadding = addClasses('py-2');

/* Primary coloring */
const asPrimaryColorBackground = addClasses('bg-gray-200');
const asTextColorPrimary = addClasses('text-black');

// Typography
const asBold = addClasses('font-bold');
const asLink = addClasses('text-brand_lightblue underline');
const asSuperScript = addClasses('');
const asHeader1 = flow(addClasses('text-3xl'), asTextColorPrimary, asBold);
const asHeader2 = flow(addClasses('text-2xl', asBold));

> ```

Author: I reduced set and prefixed with "The following are examples of some tokens:"
my thought here was to give small set for those too lazy to click on the whole list. :)

Take special note that `asHeader1` starts combining the previously defined
tokens and additional classes to generate a black bold header.

The `Elements.token.ts` consists of atoms or building blocks that will be shared
among all the components/pages/templates. Often this file contains simple tokens
where it defined by one class. These HOA can grow into more complex HOC's, being
it takes more code to define the design. If site builder continues adding more
only in this file, it could be become a catchall. Thus, we recommend putting
thought into how to organize the tokens for future maintenance.

#### Organizing Tokens

As site builder creates more element tokens & complex design tokens, they have
the choice to either add them to `Elements.token.ts`, an additional global
tokens file, or a component folder. A suggested practice is the following:

* Very small, atom-like, that are reused across site go into `Elements.token.ts`
* Specific tokens (atom-size or small molecules) that are:

>   * reused throughout site, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * reused throughout site
```

>   * and probably more complex that previous atom-like tokens,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  *  more complex than previous atom-like tokens
```

>   * but not large enough to be in their own folder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * not large enough to be in their own folder
```

>   * We recommend creating files with a descriptive title that describes the type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   We recommend creating files with a descriptive title that describes the type
```

    of tokens it contains.

>   * An example is create page.token.ts where a site builder could store a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  For example a site builder could create `page.token.ts` where they could store 
```

  The main page that combines header, content, & footer of the page. This may
  also contain meta data inserted into head of pages.
* [Rich Text Editors](https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/tree/master/examples/starter/src/components/Editors):
  * Simple : Superscript Only
  * Basic : Superscript, Bold, Italic, Underline, Link, Align Text
  * Full Featured : adds in more functionality to Basic such as Strikethru, headers, quotes.
  * These can be easily customized or extended to support editor requirements for the site.
* [Touts](https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/tree/master/examples/starter/src/components/Tout):
  Touts are blocks of content that can include Image, Title, Body, Call to
  Action Link.
* [Images](https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/tree/master/examples/starter/src/components/Images):
  Reusable Landscape and Square Images. 
* [Menu & Mobile Burger menu](https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/tree/master/examples/starter/src/componnents/Menus):
  Global Menu system.

For a more in-depth guide about these see
[Explanation of Components that come in the Starter Kit](./ComponentsStarterKit).

> ### Identify Components used in a site and their variations

Author: Added paragraph and comment about building from existing site.

> ### Identify Components used in a site and their variations

Reviewer: I took a stab at it...

The next step in the process is to analyze the site build (assets provided for a
new site or an existing site) looking for commonality in the page layouts. Often
site builder might find the following:

* Article Pages (Could be one article layout style or several article styles)
* Product Listing Page
* Product Detail Page
* Utility Pages (Such as Privacy, Cookie, etc)

If site builder sees a pattern that a site uses same layout more than once,
which is expected, this is beneficial to group these pages and create a template
for each group.  

A template will often consist of flexible area (use
[FlowContainer](../../../Components/FlowContainer.md)) and defined
components/behavior.

Please read using [templates](./Templates/Templates.md) for deeper dive.

### Identifying One-off Custom Pages

A site may have a custom unique layout for a single page. For example, a
homepage often has unique layout or complex layout that is not reused. This page
can be created as page directly within `src/pages/` in the correct path for
display. An example of this is the
[homepage of test site](https://github.com/johnsonandjohnson/Bodiless-JS/blob/master/examples/test-site/src/data/pages/index.tsx).

> If in the future, similar pages are added this one-off custom page could be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If similar pages are added in the future, this one-off, custom page could be
```

refactored into a template.

### Building out Page/Template with its components

This step is a repeatable step for every template or one-off page + components
identified in the previous 2 steps.

#### Building One-off Pages

1. Create & develop the page in `/src/data/pages/PATH`

> 1. Develop Or extend components needed for the page. (`/src/components`) or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Develop or extend components needed for the page. (`/src/components`) or
```

   locally in the page.

>     * Suggested pattern if its reusable component define in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Suggested pattern for reusable component is to define in
```

      `/src/components`.

>     * If its really custom component (or variation) only meant for this page,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * If it really is a custom component (or variation) only meant for this page,
```

      site builder can define locally within the page, or as another file in the
      page folder. If in future, site builder decides to reuse the component on

>       another page, its suggested to move to `/src/components` and not try share

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      another page, it is suggested to move to `/src/components` and not try to share
```

## Prerequisites

As a precursor, we highly recommend reading the following basics & guides as
this guide builds upon that knowledge.

* [Creating a Site](../../../About/GettingStarted)
* [Site Build Basics](../../Guides/SiteBuildBasics)
* [Design Element Basics](../../Guides/DesignElementBasics)
* [Design System Architecture](../../../Design/DesignSystem)
* [Tailwind Utlity Framework](https://tailwindcss.com/)

## 1. Create a new site with the Bodiless Starter

Follow the directions to create a new site using the
   [starter site instructions](../../../About/GettingStarted?id=creating-a-new-site).

## 2. Setting up Design System

This is where site builder will begin setting up the typography and site level
design requirements of the site.

The basic units of design in Bodiless are
[Tokens](../../../Design/DesignSystem?id=element-tokens). Tokens are the foundation that the site builder can build upon or extend to build a design system for the site. The starter kit provides a beginning set of tokens to
start utilizing. This set can be found in `src/components/Elements.token.ts`.
These tokens can be customized to meet the site's requirements and additional tokens can
be added.

> foundation that site builder can build upon or extend to build a design system

Reviewer 2: Is there an intro to this sentence that went missing?

Author: possibly your suggestion and chris's suggestion created a convergence of something not right..

just updated.. 

These
tokens can be customized to meet the site's requirements and additional tokens
can be added. This becomes the foundation that the site builder can build upon
or extend to build a design system for the site, The starter kit provides
provides a beginning set of tokens to start utilizing and they can be found in
`src/components/Elements.token.ts`. These can be customized to meet the site's
requirements and additional ones can be added.

this guide builds upon that knowledge.

* [Creating a Site](../../../About/GettingStarted)
* [Site Build Basics](../../Guides/SiteBuildBasics)
* [Design Element Basics](../../Guides/DesignElementBasics)
* [Design System Architecture](../../../Design/DesignSystem)
* [Tailwind Utlity Framework](https://tailwindcss.com/)

## 1. Create a new site with the Bodiless Starter

Follow the directions to create a new site using the
   [starter site instructions](../../../About/GettingStarted?id=creating-a-new-site).

## 2. Setting up Design System

This is where site builder will begin setting up the typography and site level
design requirements of the site.

The basic units of design in Bodiless are
[Tokens](../../../Design/DesignSystem?id=element-tokens). Tokens are the
foundation that the site builder can build upon or extend to build a design
system for the site. The starter kit provides a beginning set of tokens to start
utilizing. This set can be found in `src/components/Elements.token.ts`. These
tokens can be customized to meet the site's requirements and additional tokens
can be added. This becomes the foundation that the site builder can build upon

> or extend to build a design system for the site, The starter kit provides

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
or extend to build a design system for the site. The starter kit provides
```

> provides a beginning set of tokens to start utilizing and they can be found in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a beginning set of tokens to start utilizing and they can be found in
```

`src/components/Elements.token.ts`. These can be customized to meet the site's
requirements and additional ones can be added.

> The default tailwind configurations also sets global configuration elements to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default tailwind configurations also set global configuration elements to
```

For a more in-depth guide about these see
[Explanation of Components that come in the Starter Kit](./ComponentsStarterKit).

### Identify & Define Tokens used in a site and their variations

> Within the assets provided by the creative agency, the site builder will need to
> start defining the tokens a site will use. As mentioned, the starter kit comes
> with some predefined tokens that can be modified or add additional tokens. In
> the case where the site is being rebuilt from existing site and the original
> site assets are not available, the tokens will have to be determined by
> inspecting and reverse engineering the existing site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are building a new site from scratch, hopefully your creative agency will
have provided a design system which clearly defines a site's tokens and the
components to which they apply. As mentioned before, the starter kit comes with
some predefined token implementations that can be modified or extended to match
this design. In the case where the site is being rebuilt from an existing site
or and the original assets are not available, or if the agency does not work
with design systems, the tokens will have to be determined by inspecting and
reverse engineering the existing site.
```
